reference: update doc for follower read (#21962)
pingcap/docs: follower-read.md

</CustomContent>

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

When performing Follower Read, TiDB selects an appropriate replica based on the topology information. Specifically, TiDB uses the `zone` label to identify local replicas: if the `zone` label of a TiDB node is the same as that of the target TiKV node, TiDB considers the replica as a local replica. The `zone` label is set automatically in TiDB Cloud.

</CustomContent>

By enabling followers to handle read requests, Follower Read helps to achieve the following goals:

- Distribute read hotspots and reduce leader workload.
- Prioritize local replica reads in multi-AZ or multi-datacenter deployments to minimize cross-AZ traffic.

## Usage scenarios

Follower Read is suitable for the following scenarios:

- Applications with heavy read requests or significant read hotspots.
- Multi-AZ deployments where prioritizing to read from local replicas helps reduce cross-AZ bandwidth usage.

> - Read-write separation architectures that expect further improvement in overall read performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multi-AZ deployments where you want to prioritize reading from local replicas to reduce cross-AZ bandwidth usage.
- Read-write separation architectures that you want to further improve overall read performance.
```

</CustomContent>

## Basic monitoring

> **Note**
>
> This section is only applicable to TiDB Self-Managed.

<CustomContent platform="tidb">

You can check the [**TiDB** > **KV Request** > **Read Req Traffic** panel (New in v8.5.4 and v9.0.0)](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md#kv-request) to determine whether to enable Follower Read and observe the traffic reduction effect after enabling it.

</CustomContent>

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

You can check the [**TiDB** > **KV Request** > **Read Req Traffic** panel (New in v8.5.4 and v9.0.0)](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/grafana-tidb-dashboard#kv-request) to determine whether to enable Follower Read and observe the traffic reduction effect after enabling it.

</CustomContent>

## Implementation mechanism

> Before the Follower Read feature was introduced, TiDB applied the strong leader principle and submitted all read and write requests to the leader node of a Region to handle. Although TiKV can distribute Regions evenly on multiple physical nodes, for each Region, only the leader can provide external services. The other followers could not handle read requests, and they only receive the data replicated from the leader at all times and prepare for voting to elect a leader in case of a failover.

Author: ```suggestion
Before the Follower Read feature was introduced, TiDB applied the strong leader principle and submitted all read and write requests to the leader node of a Region to handle. Although TiKV can distribute Regions evenly on multiple physical nodes, for each Region, only the leader can provide external services. The other followers cannot handle read requests, and they only receive the data replicated from the leader at all times and prepare for voting to elect a leader in case of a failover.
```
